[SWOOSHING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The Great Sphinx
of Egypt, keeper
of the ancient
mysteries, guardian
of the ancient secrets.
The Sphinx is considered to be
the greatest statue on Earth.
Good evening.
I'm Charlton Heston.
Every 100 years or so,
an idea comes along
that could shake the world,
an idea so revolutionary,
that at first, no one
believes it could be true.
When Galileo showed evidence
that the Earth moved
around the sun, the
authorities arrested him.
Many people refused to believe
that the Wright Brothers could
fly, even after they'd been
doing it for two years.
But eventually, if the
evidence is convincing,
a theory can be accepted
as common knowledge.
What you're about to see could
be history in the making.
>>Tonight, we go
to Egypt to examine
the controversial theories
of John Anthony West.
West and his team of scientists
challenge our long-held views
about the origins
of the great Sphinx.
They suggest that
the Sphinx was carved
before Egypt became a desert,
9,000 to 10,000 years ago.
It's remarkable that
for thousands of years,
the evidence has
been in plain sight,
yet till now no one has
recognized its significance.
If West's theories
prove to be correct,
the implications are staggering.
We've been taught that the
people who inhabited Egypt
during that early
period were primitives
who survived by hunting
and scavenging for food.
John West believes that
this view is incomplete.
He feels that an entire
chapter of man's early history
is missing.
West's team has
uncovered new evidence
which suggests that
we're descendants
of an unknown earlier
civilization, an advanced
culture capable of incredible
technological feats.
Tonight, we'll
examine this evidence
to see if man's early history
needs to be rewritten.
Could the legends
of Atlantis be true?
Egypt, land of mystery, a
symbol of our enigmatic culture,
the Great Sphinx.
For thousands of years,
travelers had visited Egypt
and stood in awe of
these great monuments.
Of all ancient
civilizations, none
has left behind such a wealth
of artistic and architectural
mastery.
These magnificent temples
were the inspiration
for the artists of
Ancient Greece and Rome,
who in turn passed
their knowledge onto us.
But who inspired the
Egyptians in the first place?
History has no answer.
On the Eastern-most boundary
of the Sahara Desert,
six miles west of old Cairo, the
Sphinx and surrounding pyramids
rest on the edge of
the Giza Plateau.
240-feet long, the length of
a city block, 60-feet high,
the height of a six story
building, the Sphinx
has the body of a lion
and the head of a man.
It was carved in one piece of
wood solid limestone bedrock.
It rests in its own
enclosure, facing
East to catch the first
rays of the rising sun.
Egyptologists who specialize
in ancient Egyptian dynasties
now believe that the
Sphinx was carved
by the Pharaoh Chephren in
his own image 4,500 years ago.
Chephren is the
Pharaoh who's credited
with building the
second of the three
major pyramids in
the Giza Plateau
during what's known as
the Old Kingdom Period.
For over half its
known life, the Sphinx
has been buried up
to its neck in sand.
Despite this protection
from the elements,
the body of the Sphinx
is deeply eroded.
Although it's been dug out
and repaired many times,
nothing's ever been found to
tell us who built the Sphinx,
or when.
This is John
Anthony West, author
and independent Egyptologist.
While researching the work of
French mathematician, Schwaller
de Lubicz, he made
a chance discovery
that would change his life.
Schwaller made the
simple observation
that the Sphinx had been
eroded by water, not
by wind and sand, as
traditionally believed.
These are two very
different types of erosion.
Water in the Sahara Desert.
There's been no significant
rainfall in the Sahara
for 9,000 to 10,000 years.
West was the first person to
grasp the implications of this.
If the Sphinx was
eroded by water,
it had to be at least
9,000 years old.
The deep erosion is easy to
see, but it takes an expert
to identify its cause.
Through some friends,
I had an introduction
to a very well-known
Oxford geologist.
And I went into him with
a very simple question,
on the basis of a
clear photograph alone,
could he as a geologist
tell the difference
between weathering by water and
weathering by wind and sand?
The answer was
cautiously expressed,
as a general rule, yes.
I asked him if he didn't mind if
I play a bit of a trick on him.
And what I did was I took
a photograph of the Sphinx,
and I masked off the head and
the paws, and I asked him,
what did he think
that was responsible
for that weathering?
And he looked at it a
moment and said, well,
unquestionably water.
And then I stripped
the masking tape off,
and he looked at it a
minute, and he said, oh.
>>The Oxford geologist
realized that if the Sphinx was
more than 9,000 years old, the
entire history of ancient man
would have to be rewritten.
He wanted no part of such
a controversial subject.
In his book, Serpent
in the Sky, West first
published his theory
of an older Sphinx.
Scholars laughed
and ignored him.
West needed an ally,
a recognized expert
willing to examine the evidence
with the courage to stand
behind his conclusions.
Dr. Robert Schoch is an
Associate Professor of Science
at Boston University.
He holds a Ph.D. In
Geology and Geophysics
from Yale University.
Dr. Schoch is an expert in the
erosional analysis of rocks.
>>What I found was that West
had one very extreme idea
that the Sphinx was
thousands of years
older than the
Egyptologists thought,
so I thought it was a long shot.
I thought maybe West
was onto something
I thought was very
improbable, but it
was worth looking at further.
I'm a curious type of person.
>>West and Schoch
traveled to Egypt
to examine the
evidence first hand.
While Egyptologists
look at monuments,
geologists look at the
stones they're made from.
And those stones
told Schoch that West
was on the right track.
Schoch was encouraged
by what he saw,
but the team was totally
unprepared for what
happened next.
Somehow, word of their
theory leaked out,
and they found themselves
attacked in the press.
This is an American
hallucination.
They're exploiting the monuments
of Egypt for personal gains,
said Dr. Zahi Hawass,
Director of the Giza Plateau.
The team is ignorant
and insensitive,
this from Dr. Mark
Lehner, Egyptologist.
There is many theories like this
has been said about the Sphinx,
but all of it, gone with the
wind, because we Egyptologists
have solid evidence to state
that the Sphinx is dated
to the time of Chephren, the
builder of the second pyramid
at Giza Plateau.
>>West and Schoch were
undaunted by the ridicule.
They knew their theory was
based on solid evidence.
Virtually all of the temples
and tombs in the Giza Plateau
have been weathered
by wind and sand.
So why would the Sphinx
be the only monument
weathered by water?
To a geologist, erosion tells
the story of a rock's history.
The limestone bedrock in Giza
is like a layer cake composed
of both hard and soft layers.
The wind-driven sand scours
out the softer layers,
leaving the harder
layers intact.
An example of this is
found here in the Tomb
of [INAUDIBLE],
which is carved out
of the exact same
rock as the Sphinx.
Once a smooth wall,
it's been exposed
to desert conditions
for over 4,000 years.
On the other hand,
rain weathering
has an entirely different look.
Rocks which have been
weathered by rain
have a round,
undulating profile.
This is very different
in appearance
from the hard, sharp profile
caused by wind weather.
This is a classic
textbook example
of what happens to
a limestone wall
when you have rains beating down
on it for thousands of years.
>>It's only found in one
area on the Giza Plateau,
here on the Sphinx, and on the
walls of the Sphinx enclosure.
These man-made vertical walls
were carved from the same layer
bedrock a mere 300 yards apart.
According to Egyptologists, they
were carved at the same time.
But if that's so, shouldn't
they exhibit the same pattern
of erosion?
Dr. Lehner has an entirely
different explanation.
>>Well, Dr. Schoch is
saying have this same layer.
And here on the
Sphinx, it's weathered,
and here on this
old kingdom tomb.
it's not, carved out
of the same layer.
And we are saying, and
I bow to Dr. [INAUDIBLE]
on this as the geologist, no,
those are two different layers.
They'll weather at
different rates.
It all comes down to
that, basically, aside
from the massive
problem that Dr. Schoch
has with no cultural context.
When you think of
water in Egypt,
you automatically
think of the Nile.
Could the legendary Nile
floods have eroded the Sphinx?
>>Well, that's a
nice hypothesis,
but it just doesn't
hold up to scrutiny.
What you have here are rocks,
where the lowest most rocks,
which are a bit softer than
the rocks at the very top, just
out further.
If it were Nile
floods coming in,
you would expect these soft
rocks to be eroded it way back.
As the waters rose
up, you would expect
this to be eroded way
back, and it should
undercut the uppermost rocks.
That, in fact, is
not what we see.
If we look up there, we
see a new under cutting,
where you have a
very soft layer.
But the next layer above, which
is harder than this layer,
is receded way back.
So no, it's not Nile floods
that are causing this erosion.
It's clearly rain,
precipitation causing
these erosional features.
>>One thing I think
one has to realize
is that the Sphinx itself
is in very bad shape
in the 20th century.
It's deteriorating very quickly.
You can literally stand
in front of the Sphinx
and watch stones fall off of it.
Smog, pollution, acid rain are
all affecting it drastically
and weathering it very quickly.
And one thing that some
critics have suggested
is that, in fact, I'm not taking
these factors into account,
that when I'm looking
at weathering,
I might just simply be looking
at modern weathering features.
I just want to assure everyone
that I have taken this
into account.
Yes, it's a very serious
problem, the modern weathering.
But the weathering
that I'm looking at
is the ancient weathering,
the weathering that we
see under ancient repairs.
And that's a whole
different ball game.
That's a whole different
set of evidence
than the modern weathering.
>>Schoch was certain that the
walls of the Sphinx enclosure
were eroded by
water cascading down
off the Giza Plateau, water
whose only possible source
was rain.
This was the key element
in Schoch's argument.
[THUNDER]
But when did it rain?
>>Dr. John Kutzbach is a
Professor of Paleoclimatology
at the University of Wisconsin.
Paleoclimatology is the study
of ancient weather patterns.
>>The first way that
we try to and determine
the climate of the past is
by looking at observations.
There are plenty of observations
from North Africa that
show that that region was
covered with lakes in the past.
Right now, it's a desert,
but 10,000 years ago, there
were lakes in the Sahara.
Then there's an
entirely different way
that we figure out the
climate of the past,
and that's with our
computer models.
We then can calculate
what the change in climate
would be like for that time.
And the amazing thing is
that the geologic evidence
and the computer
simulations both
agree that around
10,000 years ago,
the Sahara was wetter
than it is now.
Schoch and West felt that
the evidence of water erosion
was so strong, there must be
other evidence in the area
to support an over Sphinx.
>>Take a look at this.
You can see the
rolling, weathering,
the precipitation-induced
weathering.
And here, you see very
nicely all these joints,
which are various fault
joints and whatnot.
You don't see this same
type of joints opening up
in the wind-induced weathering.
>>I'm standing in a vertical
fissure on the southern wall
of the Sphinx enclosure.
This vertical fissure was
clearly formed by water
running down the wall.
It would pick out the
weak spots in the rock,
open them up into
these fissures.
This is clear evidence
to me as a geologist
that this erosional
feature we see
was caused by rain
beating down on the rocks.
>>Here is the actual photograph
of the back of the Sphinx
enclosure you see the rolling,
undulating weathered profile.
Here's a diagram of that
same profile shown here.
And what you're looking
at diagrammatically here
are the different beds,
the different layers,
which you can see
in the photograph
and see even better when
you're in the field,
actually walking
around looking at it.
These different layers, some of
them are harder, some of them
are softer.
Professor [INAUDIBLE]
has calculated, in fact,
durability factors for
the different layers.
And the way this works is
the higher the durability,
the higher the number like 86
versus 11, the more durable
that particular rock is.
And so, we see some
of the rocks, which
have very durability
factors say, of 11,
they are in fact receded
back and under cut the rocks
above them.
So 11 recedes back
further than 56.
But notice that doesn't
work in every case.
Some of the more durable
rocks, like 76, 75, 86
actually received back further
than some of the less durable
rocks, like 42 or 56.
If this started out as
a vertical or nearly
vertical profile, why would
these more durable rocks
recede back further?
I would suggest
this is consistent
with precipitation-induced
weathering, where
you have water, rainwater
beating down from above.
And in fact, the rocks
that are higher up,
even if they're
more durable, they
take the brunt of more
rain hitting them,
and they recede back
further than some
of the less durable rocks
lower in the section, which
are more protected.
If the Sphinx was
damaged by rain,
and the evidence suggests it
was much wetter in the Sahara
region 9,000 to
10,000 years ago,
then the Sphinx must be
more than 9,000 years old.
That's twice as old
as history tells us.
Why had no one
noticed this before?
When the first dinosaur
bone was discovered in 1838,
no one even knew what it was.
There was no frame
of reference for it.
No one had even
heard of dinosaurs.
And as more bones were
found all over the world,
scientists put the
pieces together.
Schoch and West were now
ready to test their theory.
They submitted their findings
to the annual conference
of the Geological
Society of America.
>>There was a single moment that
really got the project rolling,
and that was actually
the moment when
we were invited
to the Geological
Society of the America's
convention, Schoch and myself.
We'd put in an abstract.
Schoch was by this time
absolutely convinced
that the theory was valid.
>>It's a basic forum to
express new ideas in geology.
And quite honestly are
quick to shoot people down
if they find fault in the
theories and ideas presented.
Much to my pleasure, no
one pointed out any errors.
In fact, they found the
evidence quite interesting,
even compelling.
>>Doctor Schoch
was being modest.
As a result of his presentation,
275 of the attending geologists
offered to help
with his project.
The argument escalated
into a battle
between two unrelated
branches of science, geology
and Egyptology.
>>We're relatively
certain of the accuracy
of our reconstruction of
Egyptian civilization.
Because if we were to
take the alternative view,
think of what we're stuck with.
We have an antediluvian
civilization
with all the trappings of
later Pharaonic civilization,
like the Sphinx, with the
characteristic Egyptian head
cloth, with the
characteristic use of the lion
in the guise of the King,
and then you have nothing.
You have nothing for how long?
1,000 years?
2,000 years?
And then it starts up again.
Where's the link?
What ties this antediluvian
culture to what came later?
Are you saying that two
exactly parallel cultures
evolved at the same place
3,000, 4,000, 5,000 years apart?
It sounds like a
Star Trek episode.
It simply doesn't work that way.
Culture evolves in
a linear fashion.
To accept the theories
that you're reporting
means that you've got
culture A, culture B,
and in between, nothing.
And it simply doesn't
work that way.
>>What's actually at stake
are the implications,
the impact it has upon
accepted views of the evolution
of civilization.
We think, and it's
a kind of a spin-off
of Darwinian
evolutionary theory,
that human evolution
is a linear process,
that it goes from stupid
caveman to smart old us
with our hydrogen bombs
and striped toothpaste.
In fact, the proof
that the Sphinx
is many, many thousands
of years older,
that it precedes by
many thousands of years,
even dynastic Egypt,
means that-- and when
that's taken into
consideration, and you
look at the way the
Sphinx is carved,
and the incredible size of
the blocks of the temple
alongside of it, when you
take that into consideration,
you realize that there was at
some distant past and history,
as the legends affirm, high,
sophisticated civilizations.
So that's really what is
responsible ultimately
for the terrific opposition
that the idea provokes.
>>As a direct result of
the raging controversy
in the press, both
sides were invited
to debate the question of
the true age of the Sphinx.
The debate was held at
America's most prestigious
scientific forum, the annual
meeting of the American
Association for the
Advancement of Science.
The Egyptological
view was presented
by Dr. Mark Lehner,
considered to be the world's
foremost authority
on the Sphinx,
West's theory was presented
by Dr. Robert Schoch,
while West watched the
proceedings from the audience.
Author Paul Roberts,
who was covering
the debate for Canada's
leading investigative journal,
had these comments.
>>West is really an
academic's worst nightmare,
because here comes
somebody way out
of left field with a
thoroughly well-thought
out, well-presented, coherently
described, beautifully written,
full of data you can't
refute, and it pulls the rug
from beneath your feet.
So how do they deal with it?
They ignore it.
They hope it will go away.
And I won't go away.
If they'd allowed John
West to be on the podium,
and not be kept off the podium
because he doesn't have degrees
behind his name, they would have
had an even more devastating
attack on, and they would have
been even less able to defend.
As it was, they were
unable to respond
to what Dr. Schoch said.
>>My own reaction,
as a non-geologist,
was I was waiting to see
at least some hardcore
data that the weathering
of the Sphinx is, in fact,
water-induced,
induced by periods,
by rain, such that it has
to date during a period
when there were heavy rains.
I didn't see any evidence.
I saw many slides of, yes, this
drastically undulating profile
of what we call
[INAUDIBLE] of the Sphinx,
with various people,
standing in the view.
But I didn't see any data that
convinces me one way or another
that it is, in
fact, rain-induced.
Our reaction is, if it was built
by a civilization or a culture
that is that much early,
where is the other evidence
of this culture?
Show me a [INAUDIBLE] chart.
Show me a tomb, show
me an inscription.
Show me any other
piece of sculpture.
Show me any archaeological
site that dates to this period.
>>To say, where's the
rest of the evidence,
as a number of the
Egyptologists have said,
it's like telling Magellan
that the world is still
flat because, where
are the other guys who
sailed around it?
It's absolutely
beside the point.
However, I recognize that if the
Sphinx dated from that earlier
date, you would
anticipate that there
ought to be something
else, whereas if it dates
from a time so old that
practically everything has been
sooted over, or covered over,
or in the bottom of what's now
the Mediterranean Sea, then
you get the idea that you might
have to go looking very
hard for it, and perhaps
even more to the point,
look in places where
nobody else has looked.
One place I would
think to look would
be wherever the course of
the old Nile Valley is.
The Nile in ancient times was
not in its present course.
And wherever the
old Nile was would
be a place to go working
with our seismic equipment
to see if we could find well
under the present silt level
remnants of a civilization
capable of producing something
like the Sphinx.
>>This is the Osirian, thought
to have been building the New
Kingdom 3,400 years ago.
Schoch and West
have found evidence
which casts a serious doubt
on this conventional dating.
>>The floor of this
temple is a good 50 feet
below the floor of the
temple of Seti the First.
Geologically, there might be
another explanation for this.
I think it's possible that
this temple is extremely old.
It was built on
the ground level.
Then, over thousands of
years from Nile flooding,
sands and silts were brought
in, which filled up the temple,
and eventually
covered it completely.
>>We think this amazing
structure may relate
to our work on the Sphinx.
It's traditionally attributed
to the Pharaoh Seti the First,
around 1,300 BC, but there's
virtually no evidence
to support that attribution.
We think it's older, maybe
thousands of years older.
>>The Osirian looks like
it was built in a deep hole
dug in the bedrock.
This is an unthinkable departure
from normal Egyptian temple
building practice.
The architectural style is
unlike anything else in Egypt,
except at Giza, the Valley
Temple of the Sphinx. .
You can see the same
massive simplicity,
the mighty square granite
pillars, and the total absence
of inscriptions and
carvings, all of which
produce a very similar
initial impression.
Could this be more evidence
from the same culture
that built the Sphinx?
The Step Pyramid
at Saqqara is said
to be older than the Sphinx
and the great pyramids at Giza.
Like the stones of
the Giza Plateau,
the mud bricks of Saqqara
have their own story to tell.
>>These are the mud brick tombs
of the earliest kings of Egypt,
first and second
dynasties, around 3,000 BC,
500 years before
Chephren's time.
Now under any circumstance,
if the limestone
the Sphinx carved out of is
harder than these mud bricks,
geologists agree, the
weatherings of the Sphinx
is the result of
water, rain water,
over long periods of time.
Since we are only
10 miles from Giza,
we can assume the weather
conditions are the same.
These mud brick walls are in
relatively stable condition
after all these
thousands of years.
If they'd been subjected
to the same rains that
weathered the Sphinx, they'd
have dissolved long ago.
How is it possible
that these mud brick
tombs and the limestone Sphinx
with channels weathered two
and three feet deep
into its sides date
from the same period?
>>When this photograph
was taken in 1860,
the lion's body was not visible.
If the head of the Sphinx
hadn't protruded above the sand,
it might not have been
discovered to this day.
Archaeological
excavation is expensive,
and permission to dig in
Egypt is difficult to obtain.
How could West and his
team look beneath the sand
without digging?
The seismograph is
connected to listening
devices called
geophones, which are
placed in the ground
at precise intervals.
A metal plate is hit
with a heavy hammer,
sending shock waves
deep into the ground.
These shock waves reflect
off the rock layers
of different densities that
are received by the geophones
and then recorded
by the seismograph.
The final results give
a graphic representation
of what lies hidden
beneath the surface.
Dr. Thomas Dobecki has been
a professor at the Colorado
School of Mines, and
he's worked extensively
in the petroleum industry.
He's a professional engineering
geologist and geophysicist.
His specialty is high
resolution seismography.
>>Initially, our primary
purpose for conducting
the seismic surveys in
and around the Sphinx
was to look for buried evidence
for Ancient Civilizations.
To this end, we
were able to locate
unusual cavities that could
be chambers within the Sphinx
enclosure.
But over and above
this, we were also
able to map the pattern
of weathering depth
within the limestone.
>>This rock surface
may look rock solid,
but it's actually very soft.
It's porous,
geologically speaking.
Since it was cut out, it's
weathered in the subsurface.
Now a rock, when it's cut
out, begins to weather,
and the degree of weathering,
the depth of weathering,
the subsurface
correlates very clearly
with how long that
rock has been exposed.
>>By deterioration, or
weathering as we call it,
the rock becomes softer.
Some of it dissolves.
It becomes a much weaker rock.
Now how deeply the weathering
goes into the rock mass
is much a function
of the type of rock,
but also very
importantly, how long
it's exposed to the elements.
Now seismic
refraction enables us
to map the boundary between
this weak deteriorated rock
and the underlying
very hard-lined stone.
What we found is that north
of the Sphinx along the body,
south of the Sphinx, and
in front of the paws,
the rock has weathered
down from the surface
into the subsurface.
It's weathered down
approximately 2 to 2
and 1/2 meters, in some
places a little deeper.
We're talking in terms of six
to eight feet or so weathering.
Behind the rump of the
Sphinx, however, it's
only weathered about
1.2 meters depth,
maybe 1.5 meters in a couple
of spots, about 4 feet deep.
What this clearly
indicates to us
is that the rump was
carved out later.
I think there's good reason
to believe that the back was
carved out or cut out
in [INAUDIBLE] time,
in Chephren's time, [INAUDIBLE]
or Chephren's time, about 2,500
BC.
If the other three sides show
weathering 50% to 100% deeper,
I would expect that that
means that the other three
sides were exposed or carved out
at least 50% to 100% earlier.
>>Simply stated, the
floor in the back
was weathered only
to a depth of 4 feet,
while the front was
weathered 8 feet.
This suggests that the
front of the Sphinx
is twice as old as the back.
Assuming that Chephren
exposed the back
to make repairs 4,500
years ago, the front
must have been carved
out at least 7,000,
perhaps more than
9,000 years ago.
>>How old is the Sphinx?
Egyptologists claim the Pharaoh
Chephren carved the Sphinx
in his own image
4,500 years ago.
>>All Egyptologists,
and especially everyone
who studied the Sphinx, and
all our critical evidence
that we have, dated
the Sphinx back
to 4,500 years ago, which
is the time of Chephren,
the builder of the
Second Pyramid at Giza.
Even Mark Lehner, who
is a colleague of mine,
tried to make a computer
modeling of the Sphinx,
and through a
statue found-- it's
now in the Museum of
Fine Arts in Boston--
he, with the
computer, they found
that the face of the Sphinx now
exactly looked like Chephren.
>>A National Geographic
article showed
the face of Chephren imposed
by a computer on the Sphinx.
According to Doctor Mark Lehner
with the face of Chephren,
the Sphinx came alive.
Alive.
Maybe.
But does the face
of the Great Sphinx
even resemble the
Pharaoh Chephren?
The traditional
view says it does.
But to John West, that
answer was unsatisfactory.
He decided to consult
an expert, someone
who works with faces every day.
New York City
detective Frank Domingo
is one of America's
leading forensic experts.
A 26-year police veteran,
he wrote a manual
on the art and technique of
facial identification used
today by police investigators
all across the nation.
>>If we had those photographs--
>>If anyone could tell if
the Sphinx was Chephren,
it was Detective Frank Domingo.
>>The faces that I've seen
in Egypt are wonderful.
There's a whole myriad
of different racial types
and different types
of facial features.
And in those features,
I've seen elements
that I see in the statues
from ancient Egypt.
>>The Cairo Museum was
established in 1902,
and it contains the
largest collection
of Egyptian art in the world.
The statues here in
the Old Kingdom Room
demonstrate the skill with which
the ancient sculptors captured
their subjects.
The eyes of this magnificent
wooden statue of [INAUDIBLE]
seemed to look back at you.
The Old Kingdom artists
even used various crystals
to simulate the refraction
of the human eye.
Detective Domingo and team
photographer, Caroline Davies,
went to photograph and measure
the controversial statue
of the Pharaoh Chephren.
Using standard police
procedure, Caroline
photographed side and frontal
views eye level to the statue.
These mug shots
would be compared
to similar views of the Sphinx.
In addition,
precise measurements
of facial features and angular
proportions were taken.
If the face of the
Sphinx was meant
to be the Pharaoh Chephren,
then it should resemble
his statue in the Cairo Museum,
>>One of the questions we
often get about Egyptian art
is, just how lifelike is it?
How accurately does it
reproduce the physical features
of the subjects that
are represented?
Well, we often hear
that Egyptian art
is purely symmetrical.
You can draw a
vertical line bisecting
the nose on the statue, and
all the features on the right
would be the mirror images
of those on the left.
But you know what?
That's not true.
In fact, it's absolutely wrong.
If you, in fact, do
find a statue that
is absolutely symmetrical, where
all the features on the right
are different from those on the
left, you know what you have?
You have forgery.
Because the Egyptians
were very canny
observers of the
human condition.
They realized that
one eye on a face
is always a little bit
lower than another eye.
One nostril may be a little bit
larger than another nostril.
And they showed those details.
>>Look at the prognathism
on the Sphinx.
That's the extension of the
lower portion of the face.
You won't find that on
the statue of Chephren.
This statue does not protrude
at this part of the face.
>>Frank also observed that
the face of the Sphinx
is more square, while
Chephren's face is more oval.
Proportionately, the
mouth of the Sphinx
is larger, while Chephren's
mouth is a little finer.
The eyes of the Sphinx are
quite large in comparison
to those of Chephren.
After completing his initial
observations in Egypt,
Detective Domingo
returned to New York
to analyze his findings.
Does the Sphinx look a
little worried to you?
I wonder what the penalty is
for impersonating a Pharaoh.
The procedure for measuring
proportions, angles, and shapes
had to be established before
a comparison could be made.
Comparison of the
facial shapes was
made more difficult due
to the severe damage
on the face of the Sphinx.
Nevertheless, detective Domingo
established enough points
of reference to make a
comparison with the statue
of Chepren possible.
These points were the chin,
the outer corner of the eye,
and the brow ridge.
While the study of
the frontal view
showed significant
differences, the comparison
of the lateral
view was decisive.
When the reference points
in this lateral view
were connected with vertical
and horizontal lines,
the difference of angles on
the two works was extreme.
The most conclusive finding was
the angle between the outer eye
and the vertical.
In Chephren, that angle measured
14 degrees, but on the Sphinx,
the angle was more than
double, 32 degrees.
This explains the
protrusion of the lower
jaw found on the Sphinx,
but not on Chephren.
>>After reviewing all
the measurements, angles,
and proportions,
it's my conclusion
that the Great
Sphinx of Giza is not
the same individual represented
in the statue of the Pharaoh
Chephren.
>>If the Sphinx isn't
Chephren, who is it?
Some eminent visitors
over the years,
among them Gustav
[INAUDIBLE], thought
the Sphinx was Black African.
According to Zulu
history, in ancient times,
their people inhabited
Northern Africa.
When the rain stopped and
the region became Sahara,
the Zulu migrated south.
This view now has some support.
In his detailed
report, Frank Domingo
suggests that the
face of the Sphinx
is consistent with typical
African facial structure.
After "The New York Times"
published its op-ed piece
on Domingo's work,
orthodontist Sheldon Peck
wrote a letter,
independently arriving
at the same conclusion.
Orthodontists work with
facial bone structure
on a day-to-day basis.
Wouldn't that be a
twist on history,
if the face of the Sphinx was
meant to represent a Black
African King or Queen?
>>It is interesting that
the Zulus in their myths
and traditions identify their
beginnings with the planet
Mars.
There was a great war, and
the most beautiful women were
placed upon what they
called [NON-ENGLISH],
the spaceship that brought
them from Mars to this planet.
It is interesting that this word
is very similar to the Hebrew
word, [NON-ENGLISH], which
means the divine vehicle,
used by the angels or higher
intelligence in visiting
the human creation.
All the monuments in the Giza
Plateau are carved in stone.
But some of the theories
explaining them are not.
One of the main arguments
that the Sphinx was
carved by Chephren is found
on this granite stela.
This tablet tells how the
Sphinx appeared to Tuthmosis IV
in a dream, and promised
him the crown of Egypt
if he would remove the
sand that covered it.
The hieroglyphics read, "Look
at me, Tuthmosis Moses, my son.
I am your father
Horace in the horizon.
To you I turn my face
and heart for protection,
since I am sick in all my limbs.
The sands of the sanctuary on
which I rest have covered me."
Tuthmosis Moses cleared away
the sand and indeed became King.
But what does this stela
actually say about Chephren?
On the bottom of this
tablet, there once
existed a few of the hieroglyphs
that make up Chephren's name.
They have since flaked off.
But nowhere does the stela
say anything about Chephren
carving the Sphinix.
Egyptologists continue to use
this circumstantial evidence
in their argument
that the Sphinx was
carved in his lifetime.
On the other hand,
here's another piece
of circumstantial
evidence, which
would have proved West's
theory, if scholars
had chosen to accept it.
>>Here's a tantalizing,
but inconclusive piece
of the puzzle.
This is the Inventory stela It
relates how King [INAUDIBLE],
predecessor to Chephren,
and build a temple to Isis
alongside the Sphinx.
This means that the Sphinx was
there before Chephren's time.
The stela, however, is a later
version of an earlier document.
Scholars argue over
the authenticity
of the information it contains.
There is, however,
good reason to believe
that information is authentic.
>>But the inventory stela has
a very unique inscription.
It is a piece of fine
white limestone some 70
by 42 centimeters.
In layman's language,
it refers to Khufu,
the father of
Chephren, as the one
who creates the temple next
to the cavity of the Sphinx.
Clearly, this
throws into question
the origin of the Sphinx.
It points to a much
earlier point of time.
Scholars have
rejected this because
of the modern stylized
Egyptian writing.
But this would be like throwing
out the King James Bible simply
because it is in modern
English, overlooking
the prime revelatory source
of cosmology and theology.
>>The ancient
Egyptians were masters
at building with
large blocks of stone.
Visitors from all
around the world
are still impressed by
these magnificent structures
built thousands of years ago.
The Great Pyramid
of Giza is perhaps
the most famous example.
2 and 1/2 million
blocks of limestone
are stacked 480 feet high.
The average weight of the
blocks is 2 and 1/2 tons.
The interior chambers
are lined with blocks
which weigh up to 70 tons each.
As impressive as
these numbers, there's
an even greater
mystery, which until now
has been completely overlooked.
In order to expose the
body of the Sphinx,
enormous blocks of
limestone were quarried out.
Block by block, the
stone was removed
as the lion's shape took form.
>>I'm standing here on the
walls of the Sphinx enclosure.
This is a massive
limestone temple
that was built contemporaneously
with the Sphinx.
We know that because we
can look at the rocks
that this is made
out of, and we see
that it has exactly the
same layers, exactly
the same lithology.
In fact, we can determine that
these blocks came right out
of the Sphinx enclosure.
They actually carved
out massive blocks,
which they moved to
and from the Sphinx
and reassembled as
the Sphinx temple.
And the size of these
blocks really is enormous.
How were they able to
move these huge blocks
with quote, "primitive
technology?"
How were they able to assemble
them into this temple?
It really awes and
inspires the imagination.
>>Some of these blocks measure
30 feet long, 10 feet high,
and 12 feet wide.
They each weigh 200 tons.
That's roughly the weight
of a diesel locomotive.
Nowhere else in all
of Egypt are blocks
this size used in the
construction of temple walls.
The question is, how were
these giant blocks moved
onto this site, then raised, and
precisely fitted into position
50 feet above the ground?
Egyptologists maintain that it
was done with ramps, levers,
ropes, and a lot of manpower.
To put the problem
in perspective,
John went to a Long
Island construction site
to see how today's engineers
lift and maneuver heavy loads.
A crew of 20 men have
been working for six weeks
to prepare for the lift of
one object, a 200 ton boiler.
This crane is one of the largest
land-based cranes in existence.
Its boom reaches 220
feet into the air.
A concrete counter
weight of 160 tons
is required to keep
it from tipping over.
A second crane was
needed to precisely fit
the boiler into place.
>>I'm looking at what
you're showing me here,
these pieces, and looking
at the distance involved.
I don't know if we would be
able to pick if any of these
are 200 tons from the position
that I see available to us.
I mean, I've looked at
these over the years.
Because in my business,
when we take heavy loads,
we look to see how heavy loads
were picked by other people
before us, and seeing how they
moved these heavy blocks, 200
ton blocks, possibly thousands
and thousands of years ago.
I have no idea how
they did this job.
It's a mystery.
And it will probably always
be a mystery to me, and maybe
to everybody.
>>If modern engineers
have a problem maneuvering
blocks of that size, how
were the ancient builders
able to do it?
Was it possible to move
200 ton blocks into place
using simple levers, as
Egyptologists suggest?
Or did they possess a technology
that our science is only
beginning to understand,
a technology based
on the vibrations of sound?
Project Director Boris
Said demonstrates
that the ancient Egyptians
understood acoustic principles,
and they incorporated them
in their architecture.
This broken obelisk
still resonates
when it's struck like
a giant tuning fork.
The Bible tells of
the Battle of Jericho.
"And it will come
to pass that when
they make a long blast
with a ram's horn,
and when you hear this
sound of the trumpet,
all the people shall
shout with a great shout,
and the walls of the city
shall fall down flat."
Were the walls
destroyed by sound?
Some of you may remember
this famous commercial.
[SCATTING]
Can the amplified voice of Ella
Fitzgerald shatter this glass?
[SINGING HIGH NOTE]
>>Believe it.
>>Clearly, sound
can affect matter.
But can it levitate
a heavy object?
For many of us,
this is levitation.
But the scientists at the
Space Age Research Facility
outside of Chicago have
a different definition
of levitation.
>>Acoustic levitation
is a non-magical way
of floating an object in
mid-air using a very loud sound.
The levitation that we do is
done by having one or two sound
sources and a reflector.
And the sound bounces off
the reflector, and on its way
back down, the two sound
fields pass through each other.
In that region where there is
the interference of those two
sound fields, there
are little wells
that you can actually levitate
small objects the size of a pea
in.
I'd love to go to Egypt,
but lifting the block
is a little beyond what
we can do currently.
The frequency
required is much lower
than we can produce at
sufficient intensity,
and the reflector that you'd
have to have above the object
would be approximately a
quarter of a mile across.
>>Today's most advanced science
can levitate a small rock,
but nothing that compares
with the blocks in the Sphinx
and valley temples.
The fact remains these
200 ton blocks of stone
were somehow raised and fitted
together with great precision.
No one today knows
just how this was done.
If you look at the
Sphinx, you may
notice that the head seems
too small for the body.
Detective Domingo reasoned
that if the Sphinx was carved
in the shape of
a lion, it should
be consistent with the
proportions of a real lion.
Although much of the
Sphinx is eroded away,
Domingo found four
valid reference points
for his comparison.
And those points confirm
that the base was indeed
in correct proportion
to a lion's body.
But the Sphinx has the head of
a human when Domingo compared
the dimensions of the Sphinx to
a typical Sphinx at the Cairo
Museum, he found that
their bases were also
in correct proportion.
Why, then, were the
heads so different?
Domingo speculated that because
the original head was already
so eroded by rain, it had
to be recarved in order
to create the face we see today.
>>The symbol of
the Sphinx uniquely
brings together the Sphinx
as the guardian of knowledge,
the sentinel of the
opening of the door
to higher knowledge, the
power of human nature--
that is to say, the face
of human intelligence,
connected with the
body of the lion,
the forces of nature
that are put in balance,
with that of the solar
system, or the greater
notion of life in the universe.
All three themes are
brought together in one.
It is the perfect symbol of
initiation into life eternal.
In the days before
cameras and video,
people had to rely on
the descriptive abilities
of those intrepid
tourists who actually
got to see the Great Sphinx.
These descriptions were
sometimes very poetic.
For centuries, the
mysteries of Egypt
have drawn visitors from
all over the world, Benjamin
Franklin, Napoleon,
Florence Nightingale.
They came to enjoy the
culture of ancient Egypt.
Today, travelers
find a country which
is still rich in tradition.
The Egyptians are
warm, friendly people.
Some of them, masters of
the fine art of bargaining.
>>I prefer Nefertiti.
I prefer Nefertiti.
She's more beautiful--
>>But of course, it's
really the monuments
they're coming to see.
The Egyptians consider them to
be the heritage of humanity.
They generously share them
with the entire world.
Restoring and maintaining
these treasures
is the enormous task of
the Egyptians Antiquities
Organization.
Dr. Said Hegazy
voices his concern.
>>[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>>You know we can that
we live in the present,
but we also live in the past.
There is much that we
can learn about ourselves
by studying the past.
These monuments are
the past, and they
must survive for
hundreds of years
so new generations
can know them.
These temples have been
deteriorating for centuries.
It's our duty to protect them
against further destruction,
and to do our best
to restore them.
>>It was here in Luxor, on a
casual tourist visit in 1937,
that RA Schwaller de Lubicz
conceived of the notion
that this strange
asymmetric ruin behind us,
the Temple of Luxor, was in
fact an exercise in harmony
and proportion.
Since both these were
supposedly Greek inventions,
Schwaller decided to stay in
Luxor to test his hypothesis.
For if he could prove that
harmony and proportion were
available to the
ancient Egyptians,
it would mean that exact
mathematical scientific
knowledge existed
a full 1,000 years
before the rise of Greece.
>>Over the course of
15 years, Schwaller
measured and mathematically
analyzed this temple structure.
He found that it was based on
strict geometrical and harmonic
proportions.
Through his
observations, Schwaller
discovered that the walls,
columns, and sanctuaries
tell the story of
the creation of man
and his relationship
to the universe.
The very proportions
of man are embodied
in the floor plan of
this monument, which
is why Schwaller called
it the Temple of Man.
Could the complex
knowledge expressed
in this temple, which
we're only beginning
to grasp today, be a legacy
from the builders of the Sphinx
and its temple complex?
For those who visit
this sacred site,
it evokes a strange
vitality which
can be unsettling,
yet exhilarating.
Architecture has been
called frozen music,
and Luxor, even in ruins,
is a symphony in stone.
To the thousands of tourists
who visit the Sphinx every day,
it appears to have been
built from blocks of stone.
In actuality, the
blocks were used
to repair the heavily
eroded body of the Sphinx.
For West and his team,
these repair blocks
contain a valuable clue
which other experts have not
taken into account.
>>The deeply weathered
body of the Sphinx
has been repaired many
times throughout the course
of its long history.
Each of these repair campaigns
has its own individual style.
>>Here's the tale of the Sphinx.
And right above it,
various repairs.
Right on the tail,
different styles,
different types of repairs.
This is obviously a
much older repair block.
These are more recent
ones, 20th century repairs.
Egyptologists have determined
that some of these oldest
repairs date back to
Old Kingdom times.
So this statue, this
magnificent monument,
has had people working
on it, repairing it,
for the last 4,500 years.
>>Here, we're looking at a
cross-section of the repairs.
In order to restore the Sphinx
to its original lion's form,
2 to 3 feet of repair
blocks were necessary.
>>Egyptologists tell us that the
earliest repairs of the Sphinx
were made during
the Old Kingdom,
and this period ended around
300 years after Chephren died.
This presents a problem.
If Chephren carved the Sphinx,
why would it need repairs
after only 300 years?
They say that the stone
the Sphinx carved is from
was of such poor quality that
it eroded 3 feet in 300 years.
That's an erosion rate
of approximately one foot
every 100 years.
The Sphinx, we're told,
is 4,500 years old.
That totals 45 feet of erosion.
Since the Sphinx is
only 40 feet wide,
it would have completely
disappeared 500 years ago.
One explanation for the
formation of the Sphinx
was provided by Farouk al
Baz, a world-renowned Egyptian
geoologist.
He noticed the very ancient
water weathering patterns
on the body of the
Sphinx and suggested
that the Sphinx was a yardang.
A yardang is a land form
shaped by natural forces,
such as wind-driven sand.
These forces,
according to Elbaz,
gave the land form
its basic shape,
which the Egyptians
merely modified to create
the Sphinx we see today.
>>And he shows this
diagramatically.
Here's sort of a
lump of rock that
was sticking out of the desert.
The winds flow around
it, start to shape it,
make it look more and
more like a Sphinx,
and then the Egyptians came
and touched it up a little bit
to make it into the
Sphinx we see today.
Relative to the yardang
hypothesis suggested
by Farouk al Baz, I
really don't think this
holds under close scrutiny.
One reason is as you look
at the Sphinx enclosure,
and here we see the rear
of the Sphinx enclosure,
the Sphinx is cut
out of the bedrock
and the ditch, the
enclosure surrounding it,
is very tight, is very narrow,
and it has these sharp right
angles in it as you see here.
It's very hard to conceive of
how natural processes would
cut it so tightly and cut
these sharp right angles.
Furthermore, the
blocks, at least some
of the blocks that were cut
out of the Sphinx' ditch,
were used to build temples that
sit in front of the Sphinx,
so it's very hard to conceive of
how natural process would have
cut blocks out, removed them,
and reassembled them as temples
in front of the Sphinx.
Also, the head of
the Sphinx does
sit above the general level of
the Giza Plateau in this area,
and the head may have, in
fact, originated as a yardang.
But I don't believe that the
body as a whole was a yardang.
>>Dr. Hawass has his own ideas
about how the Sphinx was made.
He describes how the
sculptor may have
worked on the great statue.
>>He made the face
of the Sphinx,
but he found that the
whole body is deteriorated.
Then he cased the
Sphinx with rocks,
with limestone, and after
that, made the carving.
>>In other words,
the limestone was so
deteriorated that
the sculptors had
to repair the body while
they were carving it.
Dr. Schoch carefully
examined the stone
and came to a very
different conclusion.
>>You look at these blocks,
you can see the strata,
you can see the
fossils, the nummulites.
This is exactly the same rock
as the Sphinx enclosure, really
a fairly nice
limestone, good solid,
certainly capable of using it
to build a structure like this.
Certainly not the
situation where it just
powders and crumbles
immediately upon cutting it out.
If that were the
case, they wouldn't
be able to use it to
assemble a temple like this.
>>According to Schoch
and West, at the time
Chephren became
Pharaoh, the Sphinx
was already highly eroded from
thousands of years of rainfall.
Chephren didn't build the
Sphinx, he repaired it.
He also repaired the Sphinx
and the Valley Temple,
which were already highly
eroded when he became Pharaoh.
How do we know this?
>>This is an inscription found
on the granite of the Valley
Temple, and its style is
typical of the Old Kingdom work.
Roughly translated it says,
"Beloved of, living forever."
What it says to us, however,
is that this granite was here
in the Old Kingdom times.
Now we've established
that the limestone core
blocks of the temple are
much older than this granite.
If this granite was here in
Old Kingdom times, the temple
itself must have been
built considerably earlier.
>>This is a side
view of the Valley
Temple, one of the sides
of the Valley Temple.
It was stripped of its
granite ashlar some time ago,
and they were used to
reconstruct and to build
other structures
in the Cairo area.
And what you see under
the granite ashlar
is this rough, higgledy
piggledy surface.
And what I interpret
this as representing
is the ancient Egyptians
had a weathered surface
on a very old temple.
They cut it back
just a little bit
to get a more complex
surface before covering it
with the granite ashlar.
But they didn't
cut it back enough
to make a nice, smooth surface.
>>Now this is what I mean by
the two stage construction.
You see the huge
core blocks that
come from that ditch
that was quarried out
to free the granite,
and the granite seeding
that was added later is
exactly the same thing
over here with the
granite sheeting,
and the limestone blocks on top.
And my contention is that the
current limestone core blocks
originally had that
rolling weathering
that you see on the swings.
The weathering was cut off,
and the granite was then
married to the limestone core.
>>I agree.
>>Can you as a geologist tell
if the limestone is actually
pretty weathered?
In other words, if
it's old limestone
when the granite is put on?
>>Yeah, I think so.
Because on the other side,
where the granite facing
has been removed, you can
see the limestone surface
very clearly, and you
can see that there
was an old weathered
feature there
which was just sort of skimmed
down, cut up down a little bit,
in order to put the
new granite on it.
And in fact, the
back of the granite
was cut to fit the
old weathered surface,
so it's impossible to have
built it all at one time
and get that effect.
You had to put the
limestone there
first, let it weather for
a long period of time,
and then marry
the granite to it.
>>Yeah.
My feeling was this was an
important piece of the puzzle.
>>I think so.
>>Let me show you another one.
>>OK.
>>This is a picture of a
wall of the Valley Temple.
And you can see,
for instance here,
how the granite
seems to have been
cut to meet the weathered
limestone, the older
limestone surface.
This two-stage construction
of the Sphinx Temple and also
the Valley Temple is something
that greatly impressed me
on my first trip
to Egypt and led
me to believe that this project
was worth pursuing further.
>>When Chephren's stonemasons
refaced the two temples,
they needed room to work.
They cut back the
limestone bedrock,
creating this shear wall.
>>This vertical wall is what the
walls of this Sphinx enclosure
would have looked
like originally.
Now traditional
Egyptologists argue
that this wall was carved out
at the same time as the walls
of the Sphinx enclosure,
and also at the same time
as this wall made out
of the same material.
This is a wall of
the Sphinx temple.
Notice how eroded it is.
In fact, this is not even
all the original rotation,
because some of it was cut
off by the ancient Egyptians,
we believe, when they
restored this temple.
Now my contention
is that clearly,
this wall and the nice
vertical wall that we
see here, plus the walls of
the Sphinx enclosure, these
could not have been
made at the same time.
Clearly, the more
heavily eroded walls
are older than
this vertical wall.
>>What you've just seen is the
result of 17 years of research.
To visualize how this new
information fits together,
we've created a computer
graphic sequence
to illustrate the possible
life history of the Sphinx.
Long ago, before
Egypt became a desert,
the Giza Plateau was
a fertile savanna.
At the very edge of this
plateau was a large outcrop
of natural rock.
A group of sculptors
taking advantage
of its prominent location carved
this rock into a gigantic face.
Originally, it may have
been the face of a lion,
or it might have been
the face of a god,
or the face of a queen.
To create the lion's
body, blocks of limestone
were quarried out, forming an
enclosure around the Sphinx.
Somehow, these huge blocks
were transported and lifted
into position creating the
Sphinx and Valley Temples.
Time passed.
Shifting weather patterns
from torrential rains
to the, area signaling
the end of the Ice Age.
The rains eroded the Sphinx
to virtually the state
it's in today.
Could this have been the great
flood described in the Bible?
When the rains stopped, the
vast, once fertile savanna
became the Sahara desert.
The wind-blown sands filled in
the heavily weathered enclosure
and buried the statue
up to its neck.
This thick blanket of
sand protected the Sphinx
from further erosion
for thousands of years.
But
What about the face?
Almost certainly, it's been
recarved, maybe several times.
Since nothing's been found
to identify the Sphinx,
we may never know who it
was meant to represent.
Under the reign of
the Pharoah Chephren,
the Sphinx was uncovered,
and the first of many repairs
was begun.
Time passed.
The desert reclaimed the Sphinx.
1,000 years, Tuthmosis IV
again uncovered and repaired
the great statue.
This cycle was
repeated several times
over the next 3,500 years.
There are many stories about
how the Sphinx lost its nose.
Some legends suggest
it was Napoleon's army.
Others say that arrow
gunners were to blame.
According to ancient
lore, you could
kill the spirit of a statue
by destroying its nose.
But the spirit of this
great statue lives on.
The computer re-creation
we've just seen
illustrates the
history of the Sphinx
according to Dr.
Schoch and John West.
But it doesn't address the
question, who built the Sphinx?
>>I think our initial
investigation around the Sphinx
was very successful
from a couple
of different perspectives.
One, we got hard,
defensible data
on the degree and the nature of
the weathering of the limestone
surrounding the
Sphinx, all of which
supports Bob Schoch's theories.
But even more exciting
and more interesting to me
is the unexpected discovery
of several large cavity
features around and
under the Sphinx.
This is a fairly large feature.
It's about 9 meters by
12 meters in dimension,
and buried less than
5 meters in depth.
Now the regular shape
of this rectangular
is inconsistent with
naturally occurring cavities,
so there's some suggestion
this could be man-made.
>>Man-made.
That's very interesting.
Keep that in mind
for just a minute.
There have been many
predictions about the role
the Sphinx would
play in our future.
One of the most compelling
was by this man.
Edgar Cayce gained a
popularity in the mid-40's
as America's sleeping prophet.
In deep trance, Cayce
revealed detailed information
about ancient Egypt.
50 years ago, Cayce
predicted that a chamber
would be found under the
front paws of the Sphinx.
This chamber, he
said, would contain
records of the
civilization that inspired
the entire Egyptian culture.
He called that
civilization Atlantis.
According to Cayce,
the Atlanteans
were a technologically
advanced society
who fled to Egypt when
their continent of Atlantis
sank into the ocean
to be lost forever.
Fantasy?
Wild dreams?
Maybe.
But the unexpected
cavities detected
by the seismograph
were located precisely
were Edgar Cayce
said they would be,
under the front paws
of the Great Sphinx.
A seismograph does not dream.
If the Greeks were
inspired by the Egyptians,
and the Egyptians were inspired
by the mythological Atlanteans,
then who inspired
the Atlanteans?
One of the most unusual
and intriguing ideas
I found in my research is
the possible connection
between the Sphinx
and the planet Mars.
In 1976, NASA sent two
Viking spacecraft to Mars
to photograph the planet and
test for the presence of life.
Two of these photographs
revealed a large human face
accompanied by a massive
five-sided pyramid.
Some call the face
the Martian Sphinx.
These findings were presented
at the United Nations
to an audience of
scientists and journalists.
Here's an excerpt from that
presentation by Richard
C. Hoagland, science
writer and winner
of the Angstrom
Medal for Excellence
in Science for his research
in the Mars investigation.
>>And in 1976, during the
unmanned mission to Mars,
the Viking Mission, lo and
behold, on frame 35872,
taken on an afternoon on Mars of
a northern Martian desert calls
Cydonia, we, the
human race, NASA,
the United States of
America, the American people
who paid for the mission,
spotted and noted
an enigmatic artifact
that did not belong,
the so-called face on Mars.
Now many things have happened
in the ensuing years,
but I wanted to show you the
original data to show you
how far we have come.
Because of course,
the official response
when this photograph was
first presented to the media
and to the world was
that it was, in fact,
a trick of light and shadow.
Well, from that has come an
investigation, some books,
some videos, a
lot of discussion.
And we are here this afternoon.
Now this is a
computer-enhanced version
of exactly the same image
done 15, 16 years later.
Notice the remarkable
level of detail,
crossed lines in the forehead,
scalloping on the left side
here, the suggestion of teeth
in the mouth, deep set eyes.
But again, if we
only had one picture,
we would never know if, as
NASA has said consistently
for 16 years, this was merely
the most marvelous trick
of erosion on the surface
of any planet, or in fact,
was something else.
For that, you require another
set of data, such as this.
This now a second frame taken
35 days after the first frame.
And Depietro and Molnar,
two imaging engineers
at the Goddard
Space Flight Center
who got into this very
early on in '79 and '80,
they were the ones, not NASA
to cull through these 60,000
Viking images in the archives
and to find this picture,
and when they processed
it, lo and behold,
this object turned out to
be remarkably bilaterally
symmetric.
And we mean by
that that it seems
to have a left and a right half.
There appear to be
two eye sockets,
the mouth goes through, the
hairline appears to go around.
There's proportion and
symmetry about 95%.
Now facial expressions we see in
mountains or in landscapes here
on Earth are inevitably
perspective shots, profiles,
where if you move 100 meters one
way or the other, they go away.
What made this
different was it was
a frontal, full-on,
facial view, as
if you were looking at yourself
in some kind of cosmic mirror.
And maybe that's
a telling metaphor
for exactly what this
was intended to be,
if and when we climbed up
the ladder to space flight,
journeyed across space
to Mars, and looked down
and saw it staring back.
Time will tell.
For the last nine
years, the argument
has raged regarding the
reality of this object
as a constructed artifact.
Well, our focus has
now begun to shift.
We're looking more at the
meaning of this object,
including a possible
connection with the Earth.
The key to our apparently
successful solution
to the riddle of
Cydonia, which is
the name of the region on
Mars where Viking initially
photographed the face, turned
out not to be the face at all,
but a two-mile long, half
mile high five-sided pyramid
located a few miles away.
It was [INAUDIBLE]
Torin, our team member
on loan from the defense mapping
agency, who cracked the code.
Because Torin found when
measuring the internal geometry
of the [INAUDIBLE]
pyramid, that it contains
incredible geometric structure,
fundamental mathematical
constants, which in the
universe are the key
to signify the presence
of intelligence.
This is the Sphinx.
We're now looking
at a structure,
a magnificent, monumental
work of art created at a time
when nobody else on Planet
Earth is supposedly able
to do anything of that
magnitude or scale.
There is no other contemporary
civilization to pin it on.
So who did it?
And before you say Martians,
just sit there and listen, OK?
OK?
I don't want you to leap here.
Science has now opened, I mean
rigorous science has opened
the doorway, to what, in I
think it was John's parlance,
the dreaded A word, Atlantis.
Is it conceivable that the
mythos that came down to us
through Plato speaking of a
prior high civilization capable
of things like this
is maybe not a myth?
But in fact, we're
seeing at least one
surviving, albeit
very ancient artifact,
that you can touch
of that [INAUDIBLE]
day when we could do things
that we no longer can do?
Something ineffable brushed an
earlier phase of human history
and left a monument that
recorded in some form
the echo of that signal.
The basic model of the Sphinx
is this Lion Man interface.
We began to look seriously
at the possibility
that there was
more than a passing
connection between
this awesome structure
and the monuments of Mars.
Well, take a look.
As you progress through the
various imaging enhancements--
this is the high sun now--
you can very definitely
see that this guy has a
Simian, proto-human look.
What you then do is you
take the halves, all right,
and you fold over.
Now let me go back one.
You fold over this
half onto that half,
so that you can actually
get a mirror image.
And it's very definitely
a primitive hominid.
It's not Marilyn
Monroe or Paul Newman.
Why is it primitive hominid?
Might it have something
to do with how old we
think this thing might be,
circa half a million years?
Hold that thought.
Then what we do is we
go back to the original,
and we then take the right
half, and we do the same thing.
We fold that over,
and we get this.
[MURMURING]
And I'm really gratified
by your response to that.
Because that's
exactly my feeling.
The hair on the back
of my neck, when
I realized that
what we were looking
at in the monument of
Mars, the face on Mars,
was the fusion of the hominid
and the feline, the fusion
of this persona from this,
I realized that what we were
seeing was, of course, Sphinx.
Literal embodiments of
Sphinx on two worlds,
linked by the fundamental
constance of Cydonia
over and over and over again.
>>The most accepted
ideas are sometimes
the hardest to overturn.
They seem so obvious.
The earth is flat.
Man cannot fly.
Man will never walk on the moon.
[FEEDBACK]
>>For me, though, the idea
of looking back at Earth
from deep space and seeing it
in a new perspective, that's
the most profound experience
of the entire space program.
>>Dr. Edgar Mitchell,
ex-Navyastronaut,
was one of the few men
to walk on the moon.
>>An example of changing
thought structure
is the classic one that
begins with Copernicus.
When Copernicus challenged
the existing notions
that all the heavens
moved around the Earth,
that the Earth was the
center of creation,
and it didn't appear from his
observations that was true.
And so, he invented or created
the heliocentric theory
that said all the planets
move around the sun.
And that was certainly
resisted at the time.
Fortunately, Copernicus
was a rather wise man.
He didn't challenge the existing
system till he was near death.
And it was published after his
death, as a matter of fact.
It was Galileo that came
along with his telescope
and saw planets moving
around, like moons moving
around the planet, and suggested
that maybe Copernicus was
right, that Earth was
moving around the sun.
Unfortunately, the
authorities of the day
didn't want to even look
through Galileo's telescope.
They were quite confident they
knew the answer without looking
at new evidence.
If geological evidence
and dating evidence
suggest that the Sphinx is
much older than we previously
believed, it raises
great questions
for our concepts of how humanity
evolved over the last 100,000
years.
If geological evidence
and dating evidence
suggest that the Sphinx is
much older than we previously
believed, it raises
great questions
for our concept of how humanity
evolved over the last 100,000
years.
And those are pretty
well-established notions
as well.
So if the Sphinx is
proven to be much older,
it raises a huge
question mark as to what
sort of sophisticated
civilization
could possibly have existed
to create this monument.
>>There is simply not a
single shred of evidence
that has been presented by any
competent Egyptologist that
suggests that there was any high
culture before the Pre-Dynastic
Period.
Can we have missed it?
Sure we can have missed it.
I could also grow wings
and fly back home tonight,
but I think the probability
of that happening
is just about as good
as the probability of us
having missed the evidence
of such a high culture.
Archaeologists, you
have to remember,
are not the sort of Indiana
Jones with the bull weapon
and set the dynamite
charges kind of people
that the films portray us to be.
They're very
meticulous workers who
pore over every scrap
of material that
comes out of the ground.
They don't use
picks and shovels.
They use brushes and
scalpels to scrape
away, to scrape away the dirt,
and to examine what's there.
You're talking about an
enormous amount of care that
is put into the work
that archeologists do,
and I doubt very much that
the hundreds, the thousands
of Egyptologists, who've
worked in the Nile Valley
since let's say the 1880s,
would have missed even one
little bit of evidence for
such a purported earlier
civilization.
>>Many archaeologists
and Egyptologists
have been highly
resistant to my ideas.
If my findings are in
conflict with their theories,
maybe it's time for them to
re-evaluate their theories
about the rise of civilization.
I'm not saying
that the Sphinx was
built by Atlanteans,
or people from Mars,
or extraterrestrials.
I'm just following the
science where it leads me,
and that leads me to a
conclude that the Sphinx
was built much earlier
than previously thought.
>>Schoch and I have a
friendly debate going
about the age of the Sphinx.
Schoch holds to his
5,000 to 7,000 BC date
mainly by taking the most
conservative view allowed
by the data to hand.
I think, for a variety of
both intuitive and scholarly
reasons, that the data's
is much, much older.
Schoch isn't even in
disagreement about this,
but he prefers to take the
most conservative view.
I think that when and
if our isotopic analysis
in other areas that we're
working in provide a date
or provide data that we
think is trustworthy,
that data is going to be
very, very old indeed,
I think older than 10,000 BC,
really older than 15,000 BC.
And it wouldn't even surprise
me if the date was a lot older
than that.
I really do believe
that when we get a date,
it's going to be
something so staggering,
that nobody's going
to believe the data.
>>West and his
team have presented
compelling new evidence that
the Sphinx was eroded by rain.
Now, does this prove that the
Sphinx and its temple complex
are thousands of years
older than history tells us?
The geology says yes, but
we need more evidence.
Recently, scientific
techniques have
been developed which
could shed new light
in the mysterious
cavities under the Sphinx.
West and his team are presently
awaiting the invitation
of the Egyptian government to
continue their investigation.
What is it about this legendary
guardian of sanctuaries that
continues to fascinate mankind?
>>Well the Sphinx one
of the best known images
in the universe.
I mean, everybody
knows about the Sphinx.
It's certainly the
symbol of Egypt.
And I think it's a symbol
of mystery and intrigue,
and there's something very
magical about the Sphinx.
And I think everybody
that looks at its image
feels that mystery
and that magic.
>>I'm a typical scientist slash
engineer, that I love my data,
I love to play with
my data, and love
to see what it's
telling me, and ensuring
that what I'm producing is
the best possible product.
But now, you take that to
saying that something that I
did with a
sledgehammer and trying
to avoid camels
and horses may have
some impact on how the world
looks at its own past history,
its kind of mind-boggling.
And like I said, that hasn't
settled with me that much yet.
>>Each branch of
science operates
within its own
individual paradigm.
We're rocking the boat.
We're looking at this problem
from a new perspective,
and we're providing some
new and different answers,
answers that perhaps
the establishment is not
comfortable with.
We're setting out
to redate history,
and the evidence certainly
points to the fact
that John West's
theory is correct.
>>An older Sphinx
would drastically
revise our current view
of man's early history.
Are we heirs to a richer
legacy than we ever
dreamed of from a civilization,
not of hunter-gatherers,
but of great artists,
architects, and scientists?
A civilization in command of
technologies we do not yet
understand and cannot reproduce?
Perhaps there were
Egyptians before the flood.
Some think they were Atlanteans.
But whoever they were, the
Sphinx stands in new testimony
to their existence.
[THEME  MUSIC]